The first thing I'm gonna do, I think,
is start committing these changes.
So I will check out a new
branch called progress.
And I'm going to add everything here,
and we'll say, set up for dev and
create a customer page, all right?
So then I'm gonna just push
to this steadily as we go.
So that if, at any point, you get stuck,
you will be able to head
over to this repo here,
which just opened in the wrong browser,
so let's pull it over this way.
Any point you get stuck, you can just
pull up this progress branch, and
you'll be able to see
whatever we're doing.
You can pull that down and
get back up-to-date with where we are.
So next up,
let's get some custom data into Gatsby.
And this is something that I have so
much fun with,
because it's just a powerful approach.
You can do some really, really cool
things with custom data in Gatsby.
And there's some work that was
done between Gatsby 1, Gatsby 2,
and now Gatsby 3 that took this from
being really esoteric and kinda,
you had to know a whole
bunch about the internals.
To now, you still have to
know what the things are,
but it doesn't feel nearly
as mentally taxing.
I don't feel like I have to
know exactly how Gatsby works.
I feel like I just need to know these
APIs, and that is really exciting to me.
So why don't we start up by going
into our gatsby-node again.
And I wanna work with this authors and
books data.
So looking inside these files, I put
together, we're gonna build a little book
club website here today,
right, that's our goal.
So I found a few authors and
put those into a JSON file, and
then I took a few books.
And these books, I grabbed their ISBN,
so that's a universal identifier.
The name, the author slug, and
whether or not it's part of a series.
So these three are part of a series,
these ones are not.
And anyways, these are some books.
They're good books,
if you haven't read them, you should.
And I wanna pull these in and
make these available as custom
data types on my Gatsby site.
Start this up before we get rolling.
So the site,
when it's in development mode,
is gonna generate this
GraphQL API that we can run.
Now, it's important to remember,
this GraphQL layer is only
available during the build time.
So this isn't something that you
can query from the client side.
But what's nice about it is that it gives
us the ability to kinda explore our data.
And as you can see right now,
there's not much in here,
because we haven't added a lot of data.
But we can see that, here's all
of our pages that we've created.
So our custom page is there,
our home page is there.
The dev 404, which is for
during development,
if you try to create something that's, or
try to hit a route that doesn't exist,
it'll give you some hints.
Which I can show you, actually,
if I go over to the 404 page.
This is their dev 404.
So this only shows up in development,
it doesn't show up in production.
But it's really handy, because if you get
lost and you're trying to find a site,
you can look here instead of having
to build a way to dump the data, or
something like that.
So let's get some customer data in.
So what I wanna do is,
I wanna import my authors.
And we're gonna get that
from /src/data/authors.
And then I'm gonna duplicate that,
and we're gonna get our books.
So once we have our books, I wanna
be able to load up data into Gatsby.
And the way that Gatsby does that is
through a hook that it calls sourceNodes.
And sourceNodes is another API hook.
It's a cycle that runs during the build.
We can see it up here somewhere.
They all happen in order, source and
transform nodes is when
that one's happening.
I don't know why that one has a different
name than these other ones that are just
called what they are.
But sourceNodes will give
us an actions object, and
then it also gives us some
helpers that we're gonna need.
I wanna be able to create a node ID.
We'll talk a little bit about
node structure here in a second.
And then we also need a contentDigest,
which is a way to determine whether or
not the node has changed.
Which is really important for
making Gatsby build faster,
it's part of the caching mechanism.
So let's talk about what
a node structure is in Gatsby.
So a Gatsby node is going to be an object,
and
inside of that object,
it needs to have some kind of an ID.
And the way that you generally create
a node ID is to just use this helper.
And you can put any string in here,
as long as it's unique.
Then we need to say whether or
not there's a parent node.
In a lot of cases, this is gonna be null.
But if you're doing something where you
want, you're deriving data from a node?
A good example of this is if
you have images in Gatsby.
You'll have the file, and then underneath
the file, you have the child Gatsby Sharp.
That's a parent relationship,
in that case you would set the parent.
In this case,
we're not gonna deal with it.
Children is also an empty array,
there are no child nodes here.
And then there's this internal block,
and these are things that Gatsby uses to
determine whether or
not this node has changed.
So the first thing we're gonna do is,
we're gonna set a type.
And that can be any arbitrary string,
it just needs to be unique, so
MyCustomType or whatever.
And then we wanna set what the content is.
This one's optional, but
it's kind of a nice way to make sure that
you've got whatever your nodeContent is.
And this would be an object,
I'll show this in an actual
example here in a second.
We're just looking at the details,
and then you need a contentDigest.
And so what a contentDigest is is,
if you've ever seen a checksum or
other way of validating that a file's
contents match what they did at the time
of publishing,
that's what we're doing here.
We're creating a digest of
what's inside of this node, so
that Gatsby can say,
is this the same node that it was before?
If so, skip it, don't do any work,
cuz we know that nothing changed.
If the digest did change, then we need to
blow this node away and create it fresh,
because there's new information.
If we don't set this, Gatsby will
recreate every node every time, and
that's gonna slow down our build.
So setting this is very important,
and you would do that again
by setting the nodeContent.
And you can put whatever you want in here.
If you only have two
fields that are unique and
one of them's randomly generated,
cool, whatever.
I don't know why you would have
a randomly generated field in data, but
you do have that option.
You only have to digest what needs to be
digested, and you can make the call for
what needs to change, or
what should change and when.
So this is the basic structure, and what
I wanna do is, I want to create nodes,
we'll we'll do using a helper
from the actions object.
This is another nice one, so
this one's called createNode, and
we pulled that out of actions.
Inside of this, I'm going to then
just loop through my authors.
And I want to, for
each of these, create a node.
So I'm gonna create a node, and
it's gonna start by just
putting in the author fields.
Because you'll notice down here, these are
the fields that are required by Gatsby.
I didn't put any data in here,
but I can put whatever I want.
Right, and then this is what I'll actually
be able to query inside of Gatsby,
is I'd be able to get my MyCustomType sum,
and then that would give me
the value of data, right?
That's what a node looks like.
So I'm dropping in the author so
that we get access to its slug and name.
Then we're gonna create an ID, and
we're gonna use createNodeId and
pass in some kind of a unique string.
So this is a way to do it
that's guaranteed unique.
In the off chance that you had
another section of people, and
you had a people object that included
N K Jemisin, you wouldn't want
a collision where the author and
the people would both have the same slug.
So then the data types would collide,
because they'd have the same ID.
This is a way to just put
the type name in there, and
then you're guaranteed
it's gonna be unique.
Then we're gonna set, there's no parent.
I'm actually gonna just copy-paste
this part, because why type it twice?
So here's my parent and
children, and then for
the internal, our type is going to Author.
Our content will be
json.stringify(author).
And the contentDigest is gonna
be createContentDigest(author).
Okay, so if I get rid of this,
Let's just give that a try, right?
Let's see how that goes.
So I've now created, theoretically,
three new nodes inside of Gatsby.
Cuz we've got three entries
in this Author object.
All right, so now that this is running,
what we should see is,
when this pops open, we should be able
to query for an author type in Gatsby.
And remember, that's not available now.
So without refreshing the page,
here's Directory, File, Site,
SiteBuildMeta, Function, Page,
Plugin, that's it, right?
So let me refresh, hey,
there's our author.
And inside of it, look, we've got filters,
we've got the ability to sort,
limit, skip.
And then I can get into my nodes,
and I can get the name and the slug.
And if I query these, look at that.
We now have custom data in Gatsby,
what a great day.